♻️ EcoSort AI
AI-Powered Waste Classification & Sustainable Disposal Assistant
📖 Overview

Waste management is one of the biggest environmental challenges facing the world today. Improper disposal of recyclable, hazardous, and organic waste contributes to pollution, increases landfill accumulation, contaminates natural resources, and reduces the efficiency of recycling systems.

EcoSort AI is an Artificial Intelligence-powered web application designed to simplify waste segregation. By uploading an image of a waste item, users receive an instant prediction of the waste category along with environmentally responsible disposal instructions, information about its environmental impact, and practical recycling suggestions.

Built using Streamlit and TensorFlow, EcoSort AI combines an intuitive user interface with deep learning to make waste classification accessible to everyone, regardless of their technical background.

The primary objective of this project is to promote sustainable waste management practices and encourage responsible disposal through the use of Artificial Intelligence.

🌍 Problem Statement

Many people struggle to identify the correct way to dispose of different types of waste. Items such as batteries, plastics, glass, paper, and textiles often end up in incorrect waste bins due to a lack of awareness. This leads to:

Increased environmental pollution
Reduced recycling efficiency
Contamination of recyclable materials
Growth of landfill waste
Harmful effects on ecosystems and human health

EcoSort AI addresses this challenge by automatically identifying waste categories from images and educating users on proper disposal methods.

🎯 Project Objectives

The primary objectives of EcoSort AI are:

Automate waste classification using Artificial Intelligence.
Educate users about environmentally friendly disposal methods.
Encourage recycling and sustainable waste management.
Provide a simple and user-friendly interface for waste identification.
Increase awareness about the environmental impact of improper waste disposal.
✨ Key Features
AI-powered waste image classification
Interactive web interface built with Streamlit
Support for uploading multiple waste images
Detection of ten different waste categories
Proper disposal recommendations for each waste type
Environmental impact information
Practical recycling and handling suggestions
Automatic filtering of irrelevant or unclear images
Fast prediction using a trained TensorFlow model
Clean and responsive user interface
🗑️ Supported Waste Categories

EcoSort AI can classify waste into the following categories:

Battery
Biological Waste
Cardboard
Clothes
Glass
Metal
Paper
Plastic
Shoes
Trash

Each category includes customized disposal instructions and recycling recommendations to help users manage waste responsibly.

⚙️ How EcoSort AI Works

The application follows a simple workflow:

Step 1 – Upload Image

The user uploads one or more images of waste items through the Streamlit web interface.

Step 2 – Image Preprocessing

The uploaded image is resized and normalized to match the input requirements of the trained deep learning model.

Step 3 – AI Prediction

The TensorFlow model analyzes the image and predicts the most likely waste category.

Step 4 – Confidence Verification

The application evaluates the prediction confidence. If the uploaded image is unclear or unrelated to waste, the user receives a warning requesting a better image.

Step 5 – Result Display

For valid predictions, EcoSort AI displays:

Detected waste category
Proper disposal method
Environmental impact
Recycling and handling suggestions

This entire process is completed within a few seconds.

🧠 Artificial Intelligence Model

EcoSort AI uses a TensorFlow-based deep learning model trained to recognize ten categories of waste.

The model processes uploaded images and predicts the most suitable waste category. To improve prediction quality, the application performs image preprocessing before inference and validates prediction confidence before displaying results.

💻 Technology Stack

Programming Language

Python

Framework

Streamlit

Artificial Intelligence

TensorFlow

Libraries

NumPy
Pillow
📁 Project Structure
EcoSort-AI/
│
├── app.py                     # Main Streamlit application
├── waste_classifier.h5        # Trained AI model
├── ecosort.jpeg               # Project logo
├── requirements.txt           # Project dependencies
├── runtime.txt                # Python runtime version
└── README.md                  # Project documentation
🚀 Installation
Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/pandillapallirupeswari/ecosort.ai.git
Navigate to the project folder
cd EcoSort-AI
Install the required packages
pip install -r requirements.txt
▶️ Running the Application

Launch the Streamlit application using:

streamlit run app.py

The application will automatically open in your default web browser.

📖 User Guide

Using EcoSort AI is straightforward:

Launch the application.
Upload one or more images containing waste items.
Wait while the AI analyzes the images.
View the detected waste category.
Read the environmental impact of the detected waste.
Follow the recommended disposal method.
Apply the recycling suggestions to minimize environmental impact.
🌱 Environmental Benefits

EcoSort AI promotes sustainable waste management by:

Encouraging proper waste segregation
Increasing recycling awareness
Reducing landfill accumulation
Preventing hazardous waste contamination
Supporting environmental conservation
Promoting responsible disposal habits
🎯 Applications

EcoSort AI can be used in various real-world environments, including:

Homes
Schools and Colleges
Offices
Smart Cities
Recycling Centers
Municipal Waste Management
Environmental Awareness Programs
🔮 Future Enhancements

Future versions of EcoSort AI may include:

Real-time camera-based waste detection
Mobile application support
IoT-enabled smart waste bins
QR code-based recycling guidance
Voice-assisted accessibility
Multi-language support
Cloud deployment
User analytics dashboard
Nearby recycling center locator
📦 Dependencies

The project requires the following Python libraries:

Streamlit
TensorFlow (CPU)
NumPy
Pillow

Install them using:

pip install -r requirements.txt
👨‍💻 Developer

Pandillapalli Rupeswari

B.Tech Student (Electronics and Communication Engineering)

Areas of Interest:

Artificial Intelligence
Internet of Things (IoT)
Embedded Systems
Sustainable Technology
Computer Vision

⭐ Acknowledgements

EcoSort AI was developed with the goal of leveraging Artificial Intelligence to support environmental sustainability. By combining image classification with educational disposal guidance, the project aims to make responsible waste management more accessible, efficient, and impactful for individuals and communities.

